Add Svucrg enable bit. (#867)
riscv/riscv-cheri: src/cheri/cheri-pte-ext.adoc

NOTE: _Sv32_ (for RV32) does not have any spare PTE bits, and so no features from this chapter can be implemented.

The {cheri_priv_crg_ext} extension is enabled when the <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.CRGE bit is set.
When enabled, the extension adds the ability to perform capability revocation of user mode pages (see <<cap_revocation>>) by adding the PTE.CRG, PTE.CD and <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG bits as described below.

> When the extension is disabled the PTE.CD, PTE.CRG and <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG bits remain reserved and a future extension may define an alternative function; the PTE.CRW bit is interpreted as defined by {cheri_priv_vmem_ext}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the extension is disabled the PTE.CD, PTE.CRG and <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG bits remain reserved and a future extension may define an alternative function; the PTE.CRW bit is interpreted as defined by <<section_priv_cheri_vmem>>.
```

NOTE: _Sv32_ (for RV32) does not have any spare PTE bits, and so no features from this chapter can be implemented.

The {cheri_priv_crg_ext} extension is enabled when the <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.CRGE bit is set.
When enabled, the extension adds the ability to perform capability revocation of user mode pages (see <<cap_revocation>>) by adding the PTE.CRG, PTE.CD and <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG bits as described below.

> When the extension is disabled the PTE.CD, PTE.CRG and <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG bits remain reserved and a future extension may define an alternative function; the PTE.CRW bit is interpreted as defined by <<section_priv_cheri_vmem>>.

Reviewer: I think they shoudl be reserved - if svucrg is disabled then there's no defined meaning for those bits - so they could in theory be redefined by a different extesnion which uses those PTE bits

> When the extension is disabled the PTE.CD, PTE.CRG and <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG bits remain reserved and a future extension may define an alternative function; the PTE.CRW bit is interpreted as defined by <<section_priv_cheri_vmem>>.

Author: I think one could use the dynamic toggling to fetch (say) the shadow bitmap capability while in the CRG fault handler in the kernel, in the presence of kernel revocation. However, upon further thinking I'm more convinced that this would be a hack and there shouldn't be a reason to turn off the ambient CRG fault handling to do that (actually there may be races and it may require some level of synchronisation which we can't do prior to disabling CRG faults). So I think there it is actually sensible to keep them reserved.

> When the extension is disabled the PTE.CD, PTE.CRG and <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG bits remain reserved and a future extension may define an alternative function; the PTE.CRW bit is interpreted as defined by <<section_priv_cheri_vmem>>.

Reviewer: sstatus might be appropriate as it affects the TLB operation like mstatus.SUM / MXR - or maybe not as that's mstatus. also satp of course - but that register is full.
it can't be senvcfg as that's for user mode config only - it would have to be menvcfg - so would you want the OS to be able to control this? if not then probably menvcfg is the correct place.

> When the extension is disabled the PTE.CD, PTE.CRG and <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG bits remain reserved and a future extension may define an alternative function; the PTE.CRW bit is interpreted as defined by <<section_priv_cheri_vmem>>.

Reviewer 2: I guess the bit allocation is up to ARC, we can put a note to them that they need to decide where this goes?

> When the extension is disabled the PTE.CD, PTE.CRG and <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG bits remain reserved and a future extension may define an alternative function; the PTE.CRW bit is interpreted as defined by <<section_priv_cheri_vmem>>.

Reviewer: ```The menvcfg CSR is a 64-bit read/write register, formatted as shown in Figure 25), that controls certain characteristics of the execution environment for modes less privileged than M.```

> When the extension is disabled the PTE.CD, PTE.CRG and <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG bits remain reserved and a future extension may define an alternative function; the PTE.CRW bit is interpreted as defined by <<section_priv_cheri_vmem>>.

Reviewer: ARC decide everything anyway, we dont' need to prompt them to do so!
Should this bit be under OS control? if not then let's go for menvcfg

NOTE: {cheri_priv_crg_ext} depends on Supervisor-Level ISA and {cheri_base64_ext_name} also being supported.

NOTE: {cheri_priv_crg_ext} is strongly recommended but not mandatory as a future version of this specification may specify an improved method.

NOTE: If software ignores the new PTE bits then there is no change in functionality unless capabilities are accessed.

NOTE: A future version of this specification may include kernel revocation which may require an <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.SCRG bit.

The minimum level of PTE support is to set CRW and CD to 1 in all PTEs intended for storing
capabilities (i.e., private anonymous mappings) and leave
<<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG and CRG in all PTEs set to 0, which will allow
capabilities with their {ctag}s set to be loaded and stored successfully.

> NOTE: When {cheri_priv_crg_ext} is enabled (<<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.CRGE is set), the semantics of PTE.CRW bit may be redefined relative to the definition in <<section_priv_cheri_vmem>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: When {cheri_priv_crg_ext} is enabled (i.e. <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.CRGE is set), the semantics of PTE.CRW bit are redefined relative to the definition in <<section_priv_cheri_vmem>>.
```

> The ability to load and store capabilities in the page depends on all the PTE.CRW, PTE.CD, PTE.CRG bits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ability to load and store capabilities in the page depends on all of the PTE.CRW, PTE.CD, PTE.CRG bits, which effectively become a single 3-bit field controlling the behavior.
```

capabilities (i.e., private anonymous mappings) and leave
<<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG and CRG in all PTEs set to 0, which will allow
capabilities with their {ctag}s set to be loaded and stored successfully.

NOTE: When {cheri_priv_crg_ext} is enabled (<<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.CRGE is set), the semantics of PTE.CRW bit are redefined relative to the definition in <<section_priv_cheri_vmem>>.
The ability to load and store capabilities in the page depends on all of the PTE.CRW, PTE.CD, PTE.CRG bits, which effectively become a single 3-bit field controlling the behavior.
Therefore, when PTE.CRW is clear, it is not required that future extensions to {cheri_priv_crg_ext}, such as for kernel revocation, cannot store capabilities to a page.

NOTE: Hardware-initiated memory accesses from the page-table walker are not checked by a capability.

[#cap_revocation]
=== Capability Revocation

cite:[cornucopia-reloaded] details algorithms for preventing use-after-free in virtual memory, and non-virtual memory based systems.
Revocation is the process of clearing the {ctag} of capabilities which point to freed memory, to prevent them from being dereferenced.

> A CHERI system which implements such a scheme is said to support _temporal safety_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Revocation is the process of clearing the {ctag} of capabilities that point to freed memory, to prevent them from being dereferenced and thereby enforcing _temporal memory safety_.
cite:[cornucopia-reloaded] details algorithms for preventing use-after-free in virtual memory, and non-virtual memory based systems.
```

[#xstatus_pte]
=== Extending the Supervisor (sstatus) and Virtual Supervisor (vsstatus) Status Registers

The <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>> and <<vsstatusreg_pte,vsstatus>> CSRs are extended to include the new Capability Read Generation (CRG) and Capability Read Generation Enable (CRGE) bits as shown.

> When V=1 <<vsstatusreg_pte,vsstatus>>.UCRG is in effect.

Reviewer: also the next line but I can't add a suggestion to it

When V=1 <<vsstatusreg_pte,vsstatus>>.UCRG and CRGE are in effect.

<<mstatusreg_pte,mstatus>>.UCRG and CRGE also exist. Reading or writing it is equivalent to reading or writing <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG and CRGE respectively.

NOTE: The CRGE bit is added to the <<mstatusreg_pte,mstatus>>, <<vsstatusreg_pte,vsstatus>> and <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>> registers in order to allow the S-mode software to explicitly opt in to the revocation extensions.
Alternatively, the CRGE bit could be made exclusively accessible from M-mode (e.g. in <<menvcfg>>); the S-mode software could use an extension of the SBI interface to opt in to the revocation extensions.

NOTE: The CRGE bit is necessary because the {cheri_priv_crg_ext} defines a different semantic for PTE.CRW=1 PTE.CD=0 PTE.CRG=0 with respect to <<section_priv_cheri_vmem>>.
In particular, an oblivious software implementation that only sets the PTE.CRW bit would observe one of the following:
* The PTE.CD bit is set by the hardware when a capability is stored and _Svadu_ is enabled.
* A {cheri_excep_name_pte_st} trap when _Svade_ is enabled.
Both these conditions are unexpected according to <<section_priv_cheri_vmem>>.

> The CRGE bit also has the benefit or maintaining matching polarity of the PTE.CD bit with respect to the data Dirty bit (PTE.D), and permit alternative uses by future extensions of the PTE.CD and PTE.CRG reserved bits (e.g. by an alternative revocation extension that re-defines the semantics of CD and CRG).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CRGE bit also has the benefit of maintaining matching polarity of the PTE.CD bit with respect to the data Dirty bit (PTE.D), and permits alternative uses by future extensions of the PTE.CD and PTE.CRG reserved bits (e.g. by an alternative revocation extension that re-defines the semantics of CD and CRG).
```

<<mstatusreg_pte,mstatus>>.UCRG and CRGE also exist. Reading or writing it is equivalent to reading or writing <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>>.UCRG and CRGE respectively.

NOTE: The CRGE bit is added to the <<mstatusreg_pte,mstatus>>, <<vsstatusreg_pte,vsstatus>> and <<sstatusreg_pte,sstatus>> registers in order to allow the S-mode software to explicitly opt in to the revocation extensions.

> The CRGE bit can not be exclusively accessible from M-mode (e.g. in <<menvcfg>>), because this would imply that M-mode can enable revocation without any guarantee that the S-mode software understands the CRW, CD and CRG semantics, and can result in breaking backward compatibility when updating the M-mode firmware.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure that this last sentence is really relevant... M mode does a lot of things at the behest of less-privileged modes without acting of its own volition.  In principle, turning on `Svucrg` could be done by some non-architectural communication path through the hypervisor and to M mode (SBI/ecall/...).

In any case, the first sentence of this NOTE is fine.

Reviewer 4: Yeah I mean you *can* do it in M-mode, that's where ADUE lives, but it's stupid, because it requires an SBI call to do something that S-mode is in control of (it's always S-mode's choice which value to use, and there's no reason for M-mode to deny it) and has no implications for M-mode. We should not repeat that idiocy and just make it available to S-mode.

Author: Changed the wording now.
